---
agency: Department of Homeland Security
applicant_types:
- Other public institution/organization
- Private nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- Public nonprofit institution/organization (includes institutions of higher education
  and hospitals)
- U.S. Territories and possessions (includes institutions of higher education and
  hospitals)
assistance_types:
- Salaries and Expenses
authorizations:
- text: 1205, Homeland Security Act of 2002. Pub. L. 107, 296. 6 U.S.C. &sect; 188(b).
  url: https://www.govinfo.gov/link/plaw/107/public/296
beneficiary_types:
- Private nonprofit institution/organization
- Public nonprofit institution/organization
- Specialized group (e.g. health professionals, students, veterans)
categories:
- Disaster Prevention and Relief - Emergency Preparedness, Civil Defense
cfda: '97.061'
fiscal_year: '2024'
grants_url: https://grants.gov/search-grants?cfda=97.061
improper_payments: null
is_subpart_f: 1
layout: program
objective: "The goal of the DHS Centers of Excellence (COE) program is to engage the\
  \ academic community to conduct strategic and innovative research and education\
  \ in support of DHS's strategic mission goals. The overarching objectives of the\
  \ COE program are to: (1) develop and transition impactful mission-relevant science\
  \ and technology; (2) create strategic partnerships among universities, commercial\
  \ interests, and public agencies; (3) educate the next generation of homeland security\
  \ technical experts; and (4) train the current workforce in the latest scientific\
  \ applications. \nDHS COEs are multidisciplinary, university-led consortia that\
  \ engage leading experts to conduct groundbreaking research on threats facing the\
  \ Homeland. The DHS COEs work closely with DHS Components, as well as other homeland\
  \ security operators at state, local, and tribal levels to research, develop and\
  \ transition mission-relevant science and technology solutions. Additionally, the\
  \ DHS COEs also work to educate the current and next generation of highly skilled\
  \ homeland security science and engineering professionals. \nTo accomplish this\
  \ objective, DHS S&T has developed the following DHS Centers of Excellence (COEs)\
  \ and associated objectives: The Arctic Domain Awareness Center: Addressing Rapid\
  \ Changes through Technology, Innovation, and Collaboration (ADAC-ARCTIC) conducts\
  \ research and education activities to addresses critical gaps for federal state,\
  \ local and tribal operators with Arctic homeland security missions, tackling challenges\
  \ such as maritime safety, infrastructure protection, and emergency response. The\
  \ Center for Accelerating Operational Efficiency (CAOE) develops enhanced analytic\
  \ tools to enable homeland security operators to realize achievable improvements\
  \ in operational efficiency, and to support real-time decisions related to homeland\
  \ security threats and hazards. The research will aid in identifying the economic\
  \ impact of security threats and hazards, and to critically assess risks to operators\
  \ missions and the people and property they protect. The Cross Border Threat Screening\
  \ and Supply Chain Defense (CBTS) Center develops solutions, protocols, and capabilities\
  \ that detect, assess, and respond to known and unknown biological threats and hazards\
  \ that could adversely impact the Nation’s people, agriculture, and economy. The\
  \ Criminal Investigations and Network Analysis (CINA) Center provides solutions\
  \ to Federal, State and Local Law Enforcement that enhance investigation strategies\
  \ to counter the proliferation of transnational criminal networks, cross-border\
  \ criminal activities, and the growth in criminal use and exploitation of the cyber\
  \ domain. The Critical Infrastructure Resilience Institute (CIRI) conducts research\
  \ that enhances the ability to prepare and more rapidly recover from catastrophic\
  \ disruptions, supporting DHS, State, Local and industry partners ability to solve\
  \ complex, interdisciplinary challenges that affect critical infrastructure. The\
  \ Coastal Resilience Center (CRC)  conducts research that strengthens the Nation’s\
  \ ability to safeguard people, infrastructure, and economies from catastrophic hazards\
  \ such as floods and hurricanes. The overarching goal of the Center is to advance\
  \ the understanding of coastal hazards and support successful planning and recovery\
  \ by the public and private entities most impacted by these events. The Soft-target\
  \ Engineering to Neutralize the Threat Reality (SENTRY) Center focuses efforts to\
  \ protect transportation environments and public venues, improving systems of collaboration\
  \ across the many public and private entities, mainly at the state and local levels,\
  \ as well as producing new engineering approaches to securing crowded spaces with\
  \ novel design concepts. The goal of SENTRY is to advance research that safeguards\
  \ spaces where traditional methods to physical security are impractical to implement\
  \ at scale. The National Counterterrorism Innovation, Technology, and Education\
  \ (NCITE) Center conducts research and develops solutions, tools, and capabilities\
  \ to support homeland security and law enforcement operations at Federal, State\
  \ and Local levels to detect, assess, and respond to terrorist activities that would\
  \ harm the people, infrastructure and economy of the United States."
obligations: '[{"x":"2023","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":36608032.0,"usa_spending_actual":36637964.45},{"x":"2024","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":43337883.0,"usa_spending_actual":43576883.01},{"x":"2025","sam_estimate":0.0,"sam_actual":10000000.0,"usa_spending_actual":250000.0}]'
other_program_spending: null
outlays: '[{"x":"2023","outlay":0.0,"obligation":-35.55},{"x":"2024","outlay":1789950.16,"obligation":9200000.0},{"x":"2025","outlay":0.0,"obligation":0.0}]'
permalink: /program/97.061.html
popular_name: (COE)
program_type: assistance_listing
results:
- description: "Continuation application for 8 COEs (Two centers funded at less than\
    \ $1M per institution were not included on continuation application).\r\nCompetition\
    \ of 2 COEs\r\n Continuation application for 10 COEs (Two centers funded at less\
    \ than $1M per institution were not included on continuation application).\r\n\
    Competition of 2 COEs\r\n"
  year: '2016'
- description: 'Continuation Application of 6 COEs

    OUP awarded two new COEs in FY17.'
  year: '2017'
- description: 'Continuation Application for 6 COEs.

    OUP to award one new COE in FY18.'
  year: '2018'
- description: 'FY19 (actual) : Continuation Applications of 9 COEs.'
  year: '2019'
- description: "Continuation Applications of 8 COEs. OUP awarded one new COE in FY20.\n\
    ADAC - completed successful tests of the Long-range Autonomous Vehicle (LRAUV)\
    \ and marine induced polarization technologies under development and transitioned\
    \ the High-Resolution Ice-Ocean Modeling and Assimilation System (HIOMAS) to USCG\
    \ customer. \n\nBTI - completed Border Management/Cross Border Trade Course Curriculum\
    \ and university offering courses for CBP officers and general public. Completed\
    \ Cross-Border E-Commerce Challenges with Emerging Technologies research utilized\
    \ by CBP and posted on its website.\n\nCAOE - developed tools that predict fluctuating\
    \ demands at airport screening facilities at Phoenix Sky Harbor, helping to improve\
    \ the efficiency of screening checkpoints without compromising security. This\
    \ is a large-scale educational collaboration between airports in Phoenix, Las\
    \ Vegas and San Diego contributed to the work.\n\nCBTS - In response to the COVID19\
    \ pandemic, the COE quickly initiated several new research projects examining\
    \ the pandemic’s impact on various global supply chains. \n\nCIRI - provided funding\
    \ and research opportunities to over 29 graduate students from 10 universities.\
    \ These students collaborated alongside faculty researchers to address homeland\
    \ security challenges.\n\nCRC – developed a Graduate Certificate in Disaster Resilient\
    \ Policy, Engineering and Design that was approved and implemented by the North\
    \ Carolina State University (NCSU) Curriculum Committee and the Graduate School\
    \ in May 2020. CRC researchers developed the certificate program to further interdisciplinary\
    \ education focused on achieving disaster resilience.\n\nCINA - produced its first\
    \ and second prototypes in digital forensics and network analysis. The “Hash”\
    \ prototype allows the U.S. Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) Homeland\
    \ Security Investigations (HSI) Cyber Crimes Center (C3) to reduce dramatically\
    \ the number of hours searching for evidence on recovered devices.\n\nMSC - developed\
    \ a two-day Maritime Cybersecurity Professional Development Course in conjunction\
    \ with U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) Cyber Command and USCG Sector NY. The course provides\
    \ Coast Guard personnel with foundational knowledge in cyber security concepts\
    \ and increased awareness of cyber security vulnerabilities and mitigations, to\
    \ assist in making cyber assessments as part of facility and vessel inspections\
    \ and cyber incident response efforts.\n\nNCITE - supported the analysis and dissemination\
    \ of a monthly report about ISIS in America, which details updated state-level\
    \ statistics about recent U.S. Persons charged with material support charges across\
    \ the United States. The report was sent to 78 DHS Fusion Centers and FBI’s Joint\
    \ Terrorism Task Force listserv, which allows for information sharing about threats\
    \ across FLSTT boundaries at an UNCLASSIFIED level for broad consumption from\
    \ stakeholders."
  year: '2020'
- description: "2021: Continuation Applications of 8 COEs. \nADAC  – developed and\
    \ filed a provisional patent for a Long-Range Autonomous Vehicle (LRAUV) System\
    \ and developed Arctic All-Hazard WebGIS software, which was successfully integrated\
    \ into Homeland Security Information Network (HSIN) Geospatial Information Infrastructure\
    \ (GII) and incorporated a USCG Automatic Identification System (AIS) feed into\
    \ the application.\nCAOE - developed and filed a provisional patent for an invention\
    \ that advances the characterization of network scanning for vulnerable machines\
    \ in the Internet or to perform reconnaissance, which is often the first step\
    \ in a cyberattack, advancing automated characterization of network scanning that\
    \ that will enable actionable cyber defense intelligence.\nCBTS  - completed the\
    \ development of Animal and Plant Disease Epidemiology 101 and 102 Courses and\
    \ provided training classes to CBP Training Officers and completed a Comprehensive\
    \ Curriculum Gap Analysis and Needs Assessment of CBP Training and Education programs.\n\
    \n\nCIRI - developed the Probabilistic Resilient Interdependent Infrastructure\
    \ System Modeling (PRIISM), a software product that conducts interdependent infrastructure\
    \ risk assessments. The tool aims to provide a way to conduct more comprehensive\
    \ risk assessments of critical infrastructure considering interdependencies between\
    \ multiple networks.\nCRC’s - ADCIRC model was incorporated into the National\
    \ Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s (NOAA) Global Extratropical Surge &\
    \ Tide Operational Forecast System (ESTOFS-Global). Used by forecasters at Weather\
    \ Forecasting Offices and the Ocean Prediction Center (OPC) to generate their\
    \ storm surge forecasts during winter storms, the model also now offers improved\
    \ spatial resolution in U.S. waters and enhanced physics.\nCINA - produced its\
    \ third and fourth prototypes in multimedia analytics. The third prototype, voice\
    \ analysis, provides U.S. Coast Guard (USCG) and Federal Bureau of Investigation\
    \ (FBI) investigators with new and valuable information about the speaker in voice\
    \ recordings (e.g. from 911 calls, interviews, etc.). The fourth prototype, video\
    \ analytics system, increases the capacity of HSI, TSA, and the U.S. Customs and\
    \ Border Protection (CBP) to perform face and body identification and reidentification\
    \ and edge processing, even using low-quality equipment.\nMSC - conducted two\
    \ successful pilots of its Maritime Cybersecurity Professional Development Course.\
    \ The course was piloted remotely on October 1-2, 2020, and December 3-4, 2020,\
    \ and included a total of 34 marine safety personnel representing 18 Sectors from\
    \ nine USCG Districts.\nNCITE - successfully involved 66 students within their\
    \ core operations, research, and internships. Students were able to enhance their\
    \ technical expertise, awareness of the Department’s missions, and were provided\
    \ stipends and/or tuition."
  year: '2021'
- description: 'Received continuation applications of 7 COEs.  OUP awarded the SENTRY
    COE in FY22.  ADAC - completed the development of an Arctic Ice Condition Index
    (ARCTICE) and its integration into a visualization tool for the Arctic region,
    initially focused on the ice laden waters of the Bering, Chukchi and Beaufort
    Seas.  ARCTICE produces an easy-to-understand numeral to communicate ice conditions
    that are relevant to the capabilities of an individual vessel.  This index has
    the potential to provide our U.S. Coast Guard and shipmasters with vital data
    to ensure the safety and security of Arctic vessels, personnel, and our environment.  CAOE
    - hosted its third Hackathon/Design Challenge on "Countering Emerging Threats
    o Critical Infrastructure."  This multi-COE event included 73 undergraduate and
    graduate students and 17 individual teams.  The event provided a structured learning
    experience for students and included several real-world problem statements impacting
    homeland security, in which they were given them the opportunity to design, build,
    and implement innovative solutions that were then presented to SMEs and DHS leadership.  CBTS
    - CBP Officers and Agricultural Specialists successfully completed the Epidemiology
    102 train-the trainer course.  CBTS partnered with AgriLife Research at Texas
    A&M University to develop the Epidemiology 102 course to train DHS Customs and
    Border Protection (CBP) Officers, Agriculture Specialists and other CBP field
    personnel to effectively query and triage incoming travelers, cargo, and shipments
    at our borders and ports of entry, and address epidemiological considerations.  CINA
    - provided HSI Cyber Crimes Center with a prototype of the Criminal Predictive
    Analytical Platform for Opioid Abuse software for user feedback and preliminary
    testing.  CIRI - kicked off Phase 2A of the NG 9-1-1 interoperability Testing
    Program, and important effort that will help ensure emergency telecommunications
    networks and equipment will be capable of working together end-to-end as the nation''s
    911 network moves into its "next generation" capable of handling not only voice
    communications, but text, videos, and external data as well.  This phase of the
    project focuses on conformance testing requirements designed to be operational
    with the huge variety of equipment and systems in use nationwide.  CRC - published
    the "Support Strategies for Socially Marginalized Neighborhoods Likely Impacted
    by Natural Hazards" report for DHS stakeholders that explores the disproportionate
    impacts of federal mitigation assistance on socially marginalized groups and under-resourced
    neighborhoods.  The purpose of the report is to improve mitigation efforts by
    addressing equity in emergency management, ultimately informing the creation of
    national policy for federal organizations including FEMA, NOAA, and others.  The
    research team also help a Natural Hazards: Mitigation & Equity Talk to present
    the results of the report to stakeholders.  MSC - delivered its Maritime Cybersecurity
    Professional Development Course to USCG personnel.  The course provided USCG personnel
    with fundamental cybersecurity knowledge and understanding of emerging threats
    to enhance vessel and facility security inspections and incident response.  NCITE
    - hosted an online panel discussion "Six Months After the Countering Domestic
    Terrorism Strategy: A Conversation with John Cohen" with The George Washington
    University''s Program on Extremism.  The panel featured Mr. John Cohen, Senior
    Official Performing the Duties of the Undersecretary of Intelligence an Analysis
    at DHS.  Mr. Cohen discussed the Biden Administration''s National strategy for
    Countering Domestic Terrorism and discussed how DHS sees the current threat of
    domestic terrorism, the difficulties tied to resource allocation, and successes
    and challenges with the strategy implementation.  Dr. Gina Ligon, Director of
    NCITE, and Mr. Seamus Hughes, Deputy  Director of the Program on Extremism at
    GWU, participated in the panel discussion.'
  year: '2022'
- description: Fiscal Year 2023 (completed) Received continuation applications of
    7 COEs. New ADAC/ARCTIC COE - A Notice of Funding Opportunity (NOFO) for the new
    Arctic COE was published on April 19, 2023; (awarded in January of FY24) CAOE/SENTRY
    - Co-hosted a 30-hour hackathon at Arizona State University. This event challenged
    115 students representing 11 institutions from across the country and Puerto Rico
    to quickly create innovative solutions to 1) guide crowds to good decisions during
    an attack, 2) enable effective and timely communication among stakeholders and
    responder to allow for oversight and response to an attack, and 3) inform and
    enable civilians to prepare for a drone attack. Problem sets were designed to
    drive outcomes that would align with real-world scenarios and current DHS mission
    challenge areas across the Homeland Security Enterprise. This event also supported
    CAOE's and SENTRY's focus on education and workforce development to cultivate
    the next generation of Homeland Security professionals. CBTS - developed a Truck
    Border Crossing Delays and Disruptions Economic Impact Assessment Model that was
    distributed by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER). CINA – Hosted
    six Distinguished Speaker events that provide homeland security thought leadership
    and result in quality video resources for the Homeland Security Enterprise (HSE).
    CIRI - conducted its FY2023 annual meeting in Washington, DC on December 6-7,
    2022 – its first in-person annual meeting since the pandemic. CRC - Conducted
    research to inform equitable administration and application of FEMA’s Building
    Resilient Infrastructure and Communities (BRIC) program to marginalized groups,
    neighborhoods, and communities. NCITE – released an Request for Proposals (RFP)
    that received 28 submissions and OUP conducted a Biennial Review on all of NCITE’s
    research, education, management efforts to provide actions and recommendations
    to be implemented in their next year’s work plan. SENTRY – Conducted a series
    of Advanced Development for Security Applications (ADSA) and Advanced Developments
    Encompassing Processes and Technologies (ADEPT) workshops attended by lead institution
    personnel, OUP officials, and engaged industry and DHS Component personnel.
  year: '2023'
- description: Fiscal Year 2024 - Received continuation applications of 8 COEs. ADAC/ARCTIC
    – The newly awarded Center recruited and appointed Federal advisors within DHS
    Components (CISA, FEMA, HSI, S&T and USCG) to serve on the ADAC/ARCTIC COE Board
    of Directors. CAOE – Held the 2024 Designing Actionable Solutions for a Secure
    Homeland (DASSH) Student Design Challenge that took place February 23-25 and asked
    students how they might respond, recover, anticipate, and mitigate cyberattacks
    on infrastructure. CBTS – Fostered cross-border and transdisciplinary collaborations
    across Mexico, the United States, and Canada through a single research platform
    needed to assess the state of risk of U.S. supply chain across North America through
    two case studies. CINA – Hosted six speakers as part of CINA’s Distinguished Speaker
    Series that provided homeland security-related thought leadership and that also
    results in quality video resources for the HSE. CIRI - prototyped and delivered
    an AI-based Water Distribution Resilience Planning Tool (WatResPlan) to the Los
    Angeles Department of Water and Power to make effective investments for strategic
    water pipe upgrades to optimize resilience against earthquake hazards. CRC’s -
    Plan Integration for Resilience Scorecard™ (PIRS™) for Multi-Hazards Approach
    enables local government officials to deconflict and synergize the various community
    plans (e.g., transportation, redevelopment, hazard mitigation, etc.) to improve
    resilience to coastal hazards, wildfires and urban heat. PIRS™ has been implemented
    in hundreds of neighborhoods in more than 19 cities around the world, including
    Tampa, Houston, Norfolk, Boston, and Tokyo and PIRS™ training is offered by the
    American Planning Association. NCITE – secured its first-ever patent for an innovative
    chatbot technology that helps streamline suspicious activity reporting and improves
    the quality of information shared, providing law enforcement with more accurate,
    actionable information to safeguard communities and increasing the likelihood
    of people providing tips. SENTRY - produced a series of case studies on school
    security and a fact sheet on best practices for threat detection, deterrence,
    and response strategies to help protect the 77 million students enrolled in U.S.
    schools.
  year: '2024'
- description: Fiscal Year 2025 (estimated) - Will receive continuation applications
    of 2 COEs. ADAC-ARCTIC is establishing a deployment-ready workforce of trained
    UAS operators, capable of supporting DHS during emergencies by providing critical
    search and rescue and emergency response capabilities in remote areas of Western
    Alaska. This project will expand regional capacity in the Bering Strait region
    to support the homeland security enterprise and advance resilience in the Arctic
    through workforce development and technical upskilling of Alaskans living along
    the Norton Sound of the Bering Strait region. NCITE – Hosted five separate webinars
    with counterterrorism experts discussing topics such as prosecutorial strategies
    for terrorism cases, the importance of CBP’s work to stop terrorism at the border,
    and terrorist threats to the supply chain. At the invitation of Sen. James Lankford
    (R-Okla.) NCITE leveraged their expertise to testify about the nation’s readiness
    to protect large-scale athletic events like the 2026 World Cup from terrorist
    threats at a Senate committee hearing.
  year: '2025'
rules_regulations: ''
sam_url: https://sam.gov/fal/9afafb972d88437aa3d3e63eef407b37/view
sub-agency: Science and Technology
title: Centers for Homeland Security
usaspending_url: https://www.usaspending.gov/search/?hash=b451650191e7ea508e7edf32af0cecf6
---
